Add SGX Enclave  Memory Manager (#3991)
openenclave/openenclave: docs/DesignDocs/SGX_EMM.md

SGX Enclave Memory Manager
=================================

## Motivation ##

> An enclave's memory is backed by special reserved region in RAM, called Enclave Page Cache(EPC). Enclave memory management tasks include allocating/reserving virtual address ranges, committing physical EPC pages, changing EPC page permissions or page type, or removing EPC pages. Those tasks require collaboration between trusted runtime, untrusted runtime and the OS. The SGX enclave memory manager (EMM) serves as a central component in the enclave trusted runtime that abstracts the interaction with untrusted runtime for all memory management flows and provides APIs for its clients to reserve virtual address ranges, commit EPC memory to the reserved address ranges, modify attributes of the reserved/committed pages.   

Reviewer: nit: please split lines into (say) 80 column width, which makes git diffs easier to follow.

Author: will do for next version

> An enclave's memory is backed by special reserved region in RAM, called Enclave Page Cache(EPC). Enclave memory management tasks include allocating/reserving virtual address ranges, committing physical EPC pages, changing EPC page permissions or page type, or removing EPC pages. Those tasks require collaboration between trusted runtime, untrusted runtime and the OS. The SGX enclave memory manager (EMM) serves as a central component in the enclave trusted runtime that abstracts the interaction with untrusted runtime for all memory management flows and provides APIs for its clients to reserve virtual address ranges, commit EPC memory to the reserved address ranges, modify attributes of the reserved/committed pages.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An enclave's memory is backed by a special reserved region in RAM, called Enclave Page Cache (EPC). Enclave memory management tasks include allocating/reserving virtual address ranges, committing physical EPC pages, changing EPC page permissions or page type, and removing EPC pages. Those tasks require collaboration between the trusted runtime, the untrusted runtime, and the OS. The SGX enclave memory manager (EMM) serves as a central component in the enclave trusted runtime that abstracts the interaction with the untrusted runtime for all memory management flows and provides APIs for its clients to reserve virtual address ranges, commit EPC memory to the reserved address ranges, and modify attributes of the reserved/committed pages.   
```
fix grammar

> An enclave's memory is backed by a special reserved region in RAM, called Enclave Page Cache (EPC). Enclave memory management tasks include allocating/reserving virtual address ranges, committing physical EPC pages, changing EPC page permissions or page type, and removing EPC pages. Those tasks require collaboration between the trusted runtime, the untrusted runtime, and the OS. The SGX enclave memory manager (EMM) serves as a central component in the enclave trusted runtime that abstracts the interaction with the untrusted runtime for all memory management flows and provides APIs for its clients to reserve virtual address ranges, commit EPC memory to the reserved address ranges, and modify attributes of the reserved/committed pages.   

Reviewer 2: Few comments/questions:
- The paragraph mentions "... collaboration among trusted runtime, untrusted runtime, and the OS." However, I don't see the OS is mentioned in the following sentences.
- Does EMM run in a dedicated enclave or part of each enclave application? That is, does a "client" refer to the enclave which talks to the EMM enclave or the enclave includes the EMM. Can you clarify a bit more?

> An enclave's memory is backed by a special reserved region in RAM, called Enclave Page Cache (EPC). Enclave memory management tasks include allocating/reserving virtual address ranges, committing physical EPC pages, changing EPC page permissions or page type, and removing EPC pages. Those tasks require collaboration between the trusted runtime, the untrusted runtime, and the OS. The SGX enclave memory manager (EMM) serves as a central component in the enclave trusted runtime that abstracts the interaction with the untrusted runtime for all memory management flows and provides APIs for its clients to reserve virtual address ranges, commit EPC memory to the reserved address ranges, and modify attributes of the reserved/committed pages.   

Author: will do for next verion

> An enclave's memory is backed by a special reserved region in RAM, called Enclave Page Cache (EPC). Enclave memory management tasks include allocating/reserving virtual address ranges, committing physical EPC pages, changing EPC page permissions or page type, and removing EPC pages. Those tasks require collaboration between the trusted runtime, the untrusted runtime, and the OS. The SGX enclave memory manager (EMM) serves as a central component in the enclave trusted runtime that abstracts the interaction with the untrusted runtime for all memory management flows and provides APIs for its clients to reserve virtual address ranges, commit EPC memory to the reserved address ranges, and modify attributes of the reserved/committed pages.   

Author: EMM does not directly work with OS, but rather thru interaction with  untrusted time. So no need to mention OS.

I mentioned typical clients below: The public EMM APIs defined here are most likely invoked by some intermediate runtime level components for specific usages, such as dynamic heap/stack, mmap, mprotect, higher level language JIT compiler, etc.

I think special reserved memory sounds better in this case or I should use a different term. I'll take other suggestions in next version

The sgx_mm_alloc API allows clients to specify one of three committing modes for an allocation: 
- EMA_RESERVE, only the virtual address range is reserved. No EPC pages will be committed in this mode.  
- EMA_COMMIT_NOW: reserves and commits physical EPC committed upon allocation. EACCEPT will be done immediately.
- EMA_COMMIT_ON_DEMAND: EACCEPT is done on demand, see below on committing and uncommitting.

An allocation, once created, will own its address range until the deallocation API, sgx_mm_dealloc, is called upon. No two active allocations can have overlapping address ranges.

**Commit, Uncommit Enclave Memory**

When a page in COMMIT_ON_DEMAND allocations is accessed, a page fault occurs if the page was not yet commited.  The EMM will perform EACCEPT to commit the EPC page on page fault after OS doing EAUG. 

The clients can also call the EMM commit API, sgx_mm_commit, to proactively commit specific sub-regions in a COMMIT_ON_DEMAND allocation to avoid future page fault.

> Some EMM clients, <i>e.g.</i>, a dynamic code loader wishing to load code on page fault, can register a custom handler for page fault at the time of allocation request. In the custom page fault handler, it can invoke an API, sgx_mm_commit_data, to commit and load data to newly committed EPC page at the same time as supported by EACCEPTCOPY. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some EMM clients, <i>e.g.</i>, a dynamic code loader wishing to load code on page faults, can register a custom handler for page faults at the time of allocation request. In the custom page fault handler, it can invoke an API, sgx_mm_commit_data, to commit and load data to newly committed EPC page at the same time as supported by EACCEPTCOPY. 
```

Committed pages will stay committed (regardless how they were committed) until the clients calls the uncommit API, sgx_mm_uncommit, on them or the allocation they belong to is deallocated by sgx_mm_dealloc.    

**Modify Page Attributes**

The EMM clients may call sgx_mm_modify/sgx_mm_modify_ex to request permissions and/or page type changes for pages in existing allocations.

## Notes on Internal Design ##

> The enclave memory manager keeps track of memory allocation and layout info inside enclave address range (ELRANGE) using an internal structure called Enclave Memory Area (EMA) List. The EMA and EMA list are considered private data structure of memory manager, and their internals are not exposed in client-facing APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The enclave memory manager keeps track of memory allocation and layout info inside enclave address range (ELRANGE) using an internal structure called the Enclave Memory Area (EMA) List. The EMA and EMA list are considered private data structure of memory manager, and their internals are not exposed in client-facing APIs.
```

Also I cannot parse the grammar of "EMA and EMA list are considered private data structure of memory manager".   structure is singular but 'are' is plural.  Are "EMA" and "EMA list" two different things?

- The EMA list tracks all memory regions in use (reserved, committed, commit-on-demand) in ELRANGE.
- Ranges in ELRANGE not tracked by an EMA are considered free and ready for new allocations
- The EMM labels certain EMAs reserved for runtime or its internal usage and make them not accessible from public APIs.
- A thread calling an EMM API on an EMA with operation pending in another thread will wait until the pending operation is finished. 

**Assumptions:**

- When enclave is loaded, the OS has reserved the whole address range covered by ELRANGE. It is assumed the host app will not remap any part of this reserved range.

>   - In future, when the new feature that allows loading enclave with base address at zero, we may support partial ELRANGE reserved by the OS.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - In the future, when the new feature that allows loading an enclave with base address at zero, we may support partial ELRANGE reserved by the OS.  
```

> - Memory manager does not check EPC pressure, or proactively trim pages when EPC runs low. The OS can reclaim EPC pages when EPC running low or cgroups threshold reached

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The memory manager does not check EPC pressure, or proactively trim pages when EPC runs low. The OS can reclaim EPC pages when EPC is running low or the cgroups threshold is reached
```

Also regarding "when cgroups threshold reached": how does this apply to Windows?

> - Memory manager does not maintain and recycle committed then freed pages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The memory manager does not maintain and recycle committed then freed pages
```

>   - Whenever a page is freed (via dealloc or uncommit API), it is trimmed from enclave and need be re-allocated and committed before re-use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Whenever a page is freed (via dealloc or uncommit API), it is trimmed from enclave and needs to be re-allocated and committed before re-use.
```

>   - Owner of a region can re-purpose a sub-region of it by calling sgx_mm_modify_type/permissions to split out the sub-region to be reused.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The owner of a region can re-purpose a sub-region of it by calling sgx_mm_modify_type/permissions to split out the sub-region to be reused.
```

> - Memory manager does not call back client for #GP handling. Memory manager code will ensure itself would not cause #GP, and only register a #PF handler with the enclave global exception handler registry. Clients wish to handle #GP can register its own exception handler with the global handler registry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The memory manager does not call back into the client for #GP handling. Memory manager code will ensure that it itself would not cause #GP, and only registers a #PF handler with the enclave global exception handler registry. A client wanting to handle #GP can register its own exception handler with the global handler registry.
```

> Public APIs

Reviewer: In which library file?

-----------------

> ### sgx_mm_alloc

Reviewer: Also, are these proposed as APIs to be added to OE?  (where APIs would be prefixed with `oe_`)

Author: The intent is to reuse implementation of these APIs between OE and Intel SGX sdk. I'm not very familiar with OE yet. From what I see, if we decide to expose these as common APIs across different technologies for OE, then we need add these APIs with oe_ prefix, and do weak alias for SGX impl?

Reviewer: Do you really need a weak alias?  I suspect a simple #define macro that defines one to be an alias for the other, would be sufficient.

Reviewer: Also I don't see any text in this document about "reuse implementation".   Please explain the code relationship.  Does one depend on the other or should it be in a separate common library consumed by both?

Author: Per discussion in arch forum, we plan to reuse it as lib

Allocate a new memory region inside enclave and optionally register a custom page fault handler for the region

```
/**
 * Page fault (#PF) info reported in the SGX SSA MISC region.
 */
typedef struct _sgx_pfinfo
{
    uint64_t maddr;                     //address for #PF
    union _pfec {                          
        uint32_t errcd;      
        struct {//PFEC bits
            uint32_t p       : 1;    // P flag
            uint32_t rw      : 1;    // RW access flag, 0 for read, 1 for write
            uint32_t         : 13;   // U/S, I/O, PK and reserved bits not relevant for SGX PF
            uint32_t sgx     : 1;    // SGX bit
            uint32_t         : 16;   // reserved bits
        };
    } pfec;
    uint32_t reserved; 

> } sgx_pfinfo;

Reviewer 2: Note from OE: the similar data structure will be supported by OE as part of #3984.

/**
 * Custom page fault (#PF) handler, do usage specific processing upon #PF, e.g. loading data
 * and verify its trustworthiness, then call sgx_mm_commit_data to explicitly EACCEPTCOPY data.
 * This custom handler is passed into sgx_mm_alloc, and associated with the newly allocated region.
 * The memory manager calls the handler when a #PF happens in the associated region.
 * 
 * @param[in] pfinfo, info reported in the SSA MISC region for page fault
 * @param[in] private_data, private data provided by handler in sgx_mm_alloc call.

>  * @return EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_EXECUTION on success handling the exception.

Reviewer: use `retval` not `return` for discrete values

Author: will do for next version

>  *    abort if internal corruption detected, Otherwise EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_SEARCH.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 *    abort if internal corruption detected. Otherwise EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_SEARCH.
```

 */

> typedef int (*enclave_fault_handler_t)(const sgx_pfinfo* pfinfo, void* private_data);

Reviewer 2: Note that if we want to implement this on OE, we should reuse OE's exception handler interfaces.

Author: This is a callback invoked by EMM, speciifc for PF. EMM implementation itself would need register runtime specific exception handler interface with the global registry

/**
* Allocate a new memory region in enclave address space (ELRANGE).
* @param[in] addr requested address, page aligned, if NULL is provided, then the function will select the address
* @param[in] length size of the region in multiples of page size in bytes
* @param[in] flags a bitwise OR of flags describing committing mode, committing order, address preference.
*        Flags should include exactly one of following for committing mode:
*            - EMA_RESERVE: just reserve an address range, no EPC commited. To allocate memory on a reserved range, 
*                           call this function again with EMA_COMMIT_ON_DEMAND or EMA_COMMIT_NOW.
*            - EMA_COMMIT_NOW: reserves memory range and commit EPC pages. EACCEPT for all allocated pages 
*                              are done when this function returns.
*            - EMA_COMMIT_ON_DEMAND: reserves memory range, EPC pages are committed (EACCEPT) on demand upon #PF.
*        ORed with zero or one of the committing order flags:

> *            - EMA_GROWSDOWN: always commit pages from higher to lower addresses, no gaps in addresses above the last commited
> *            - EMA_GROWSUP:   always commit pages from lower to higher addresses, no gaps in addresses below the last commited.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*            - EMA_GROWSDOWN: always commit pages from higher to lower addresses, no gaps in addresses above the last committed.
*            - EMA_GROWSUP:   always commit pages from lower to higher addresses, no gaps in addresses below the last committed.
```

*        Optionally ORed with EMA_FIXED to indicate allocation at fixed address. 
*
* @param[in] handler, custom handler for page faults in this region, NULL if no custom handling needed
* @param[in] handler_private, private data for the @handler, which will be passed back when the handler is called.
* @param[out] out_addr, pointer to store the start address of allocated range. Set to valid address by the function on success, NULL otherwise. 
* @return 0 on success. EEXIST if range requested is overlapping a region in use and EMA_FIXED is requested,
* ENOMEM for out of memory, EACCES if region is outside enclave address space.
*/

> int sgx_mm_alloc(void *addr, size_t length, int flags, enclave_fault_handler_t handler, void* handler_private, void** out_addr)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
int sgx_mm_alloc(void *address, size_t length, int flags, enclave_fault_handler_t handler, void* handler_private, void** out_address)
```
OE style guidelines say to avoid abbreviations

Author: As we will position this as separate library, I'll keep abbreviations for now :-)

```

**Remarks:**
- If the desired address/range is in use, return a different start address if EMA_FIXED flag is not set.
- Permissions of newly allocated regions are always PROT_READ|PROT_WRiTE and page type PT_REG, except for EMA_RESERVE mode regions which will have PROT_NONE.
- Once allocated by sgx_mm_alloc, a region will stay in allocated state and become deallocated once sgx_mm_dealloc is called. 
- If sgx_mm_dealloc on a partial range of a previously allocated region, then the region is split,and the freed range is deallocated. The remainder of the region stays allocated. 
- If all pages in the region are freed by sgx_mm_dealloc, then the whole region is released, and the memory manager no longer tracks the region. 

### sgx_mm_uncommit and sgx_mm_dealloc

```
/**
* Uncommit (trim) physical EPC pages in a previously committed range. 
* The pages in the allocation are freed, but the address range is still reserved.
* @param[in] addr page aligned start address of the region to be trimmed

> * @param[in] length size in bytes of multiples of page size.

Reviewer: nit: be consistent in terms of whether argument descriptions in in period or not

 * are not allowed (e.g., not allowed by target page type or SELinux policy), or target page type 
 * is no allowed by this call, e.g., PT_TRIM, -1 otherwise. 
 */
int sgx_mm_modify_ex(void *addr, size_t length, int prot, int type);

/**
 * Change permissions of an allocated region
 * Equivalent to sgx_mm_modify_ex(addr, length, prot, -1) 
 */
int sgx_mm_modify_permissions(void *addr, size_t length, int prot);
/**
 * Change permissions of an allocated region
 * Equivalent to sgx_mm_modify_ex(addr, length, -1, type) 
 */
int sgx_mm_modify_type(void *addr, size_t length, int type);

```
**Remarks:**
- The memory manager will track current permissions for each region, and can determine whether new permission requires OCALL for EMODPR, e.g RW<->RX, RW->R
- This API should not be used to change EPC page type to PT_TRIM. Trimming pages are done by sgx_mm_uncommit and sgx_mm_dealloc only.

### sgx_mm_commit
```
/**
* Commit a partial or full range of memory allocated previously with EMA_COMMIT_ON_DEMAND.
* The API will return 0 if all pages in the requested range are successfully committed. 

> * Calling this API on pages already committed has not effect. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Calling this API on pages already committed has no effect. 
```

* @param[in] addr, page aligned starting address
* @param[in] length, length of the region in bytes of multiples of page size.

> * @return 0 on success. EINVAL if any requested page is not in any previously allocated regions, -1 otherwise 

Reviewer: Why return -1 for other failures instead of a more specific error code from https://linux.die.net/man/3/errno or from `oe_result_t`?

Author: updated to return EFAULT for all other errors

 * @param[in] flags, must be MAP_SHARED | MAP_FIXED masked with optional flags:
 *              MAP_POPULATE: hint for kernel to EAUG pages as soon as possible.
 *              MAP_GROWSDOWN: used for stacks. The mapping will grow down to the next mapping.
 * @param[out] out_addr, start address of region reserved by OS
 * @return 0 on success, or error code similar to mmap
 */
int mmap_ocall(void* addr, size_t length, int flags, void** out_addr);
/**
 *
 * call OS mprotect to change permission, type, or notify EACCEPT done after TRIM
 * 
 * @param[in] addr, start address of the memory to change protections
 * @param[in] length, length of the area.  This must be a multiple of the page size.
 * @param[in] prot, this must be OR'ed of following:
 *            PROT_READ
 *            PROT_WRITE
 *            PROT_EXEC
 *            PROT_TRIM: change the page type to PT_TRIM, implies RW. 
 *            PROT_TCS: change the page type to PT_TCS
 *            PROT_SS_FIRST
 *            PROT_SS_REST
 *            PROT_NONE: Signal the kernel EACCEPT is done for PT_TRIM pages. 
 * @return 0 on success, or error code similar to mprotect
 */

> mprotect_ocall(void*addr, int flags)

Reviewer 2: missing function type and `;` at the end

```

Metadata,  File format
---------------------------------------

Enclave metadata and file format are runtime specific. Detailed design is out of scope of this document.
It is required that the enclave file should include metadata of memory layout of initial code and data (e.g., program headers and PT_LOAD segments in ELF file), any reserved region for special purposes, e.g. minimal heap, stack, TCS areas, SSAs for expected minimal number of threads, etc.
 

EMM Initialization and Tracking Initially Committed (EADDed) Regions
---------------------------------------------------------------------

The memory manager must be initialized in first ECALL (ECMD_INIT_ENCLAVE in Intel SGX SDK) before any other clients can use it. Therefore, code and data of the memory manager will be part of initial enclave image that are loaded with EADD before EINIT, and as a part of the trusted runtime. 

> The trusted runtime should enumerate all initial committed regions (code, data, heap, stack, TCS, SSA), and call the EMM internal APIs to setup initial entries in the EMA list to track existing regions and mark some of them not modifiable by EMM public APIs. Runtime also ensures there is enough reserved space on heap for EMM to create the initial EMA list and the entries. Once initialized, the memory manager can reserve its own space for future expansion of the EMA list, and special EMAs to hold EMA objects. To keep it simple, the expansion can be done eagerly: commit more pages for EMA list once unused committed space in the EMA List Region below certain threshold.

Reviewer 2: Note for OE: This option indicates some work to the OE loader. Currently we don't explicitly pass the full enclave layout information (only necessary ones for relocations and heap allocators) to the enclave.

Author: Please see updated version with abstraction layer spec

Enclave Page Cache (EPC). Enclave memory management tasks include
allocating/reserving virtual address ranges, committing physical EPC pages,
changing EPC page permissions or page types, and removing EPC pages.
Those tasks require collaboration between the trusted runtime, the untrusted
runtime, and the OS. The SGX enclave memory manager (EMM) serves as a central
component in the enclave trusted runtime that abstracts the interaction with
the untrusted runtime for all memory management flows and provides APIs for
its clients to reserve virtual address ranges, commit EPC memory to the reserved
address ranges, and modify attributes of the reserved/committed pages.

For details of specific memory management related flows, please refer to
[the SGX EDMM driver API spec](https://github.com/openenclave/openenclave/docs/DesignDocs/SGX2-EDMM-driver-interface.md).
The public EMM APIs defined here are most likely invoked by some intermediate
runtime level components for specific usages, such as dynamic heap/stack, mmap,
mprotect, higher level language JIT compiler, etc.

## User Experience ##

**Allocate, Deallocate Enclave Memory**

> The EMM provides an API, sgx_mm_alloc, for clients to request enclave memory

Reviewer: Clarify: when this says "the EMM provides an API", which SDK/library is this referring to?  PSW?  The Intel SGX SDK for Linux?  The Intel SGX SDK for Windows?  (Presumably it's not the OE SDK or the API name would start with oe_ instead.)  And what is the "client" here, is it an app or the OE SDK?  (I *think* this is answered down at line 78 but since it's way below, this text is confusing.  I might suggest moving the Runtime Abstraction Layer section starting at 72 up before this section.)

Author: will move up the abstraction layer section to give more context. thx

When a page in COMMIT_ON_DEMAND allocations is accessed, a page fault occurs if
the page was not yet committed.  The EMM will perform EACCEPT to commit the EPC
page on page fault after OS doing EAUG.

The clients can also call the EMM commit API, sgx_mm_commit, to proactively
commit specific sub-regions in a COMMIT_ON_DEMAND allocation to avoid
future page fault.

Some EMM clients, <i>e.g.</i>, a dynamic code loader wishing to load code on
page faults, can register a custom handler for page faults at the time of
allocation request. In the custom page fault handler, it can invoke an API,
sgx_mm_commit_data, to commit and load data to newly committed EPC page at
the same time as supported by EACCEPTCOPY.

Committed pages will stay committed (regardless how they were committed) until
the clients calls the uncommit API, sgx_mm_uncommit, on them or the allocation
they belong to is deallocated by sgx_mm_dealloc.

**Modify Page Attributes**

The EMM clients may call sgx_mm_modify/sgx_mm_modify_ex to request permissions
and/or page type changes for pages in existing allocations.

**Runtime Abstraction Layer**

To make the EMM implementation portable across different SGX runtimes,

> e.g., OpenEnclave and Intel SGX SDKs, this document also proposes an abstraction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
e.g., Open Enclave and Intel SGX SDKs, this document also proposes an abstraction
```

layer for the runtimes. The runtime abstraction layer APIs are invoked by the EMM
to make necessary OCalls, register and receive callbacks on page faults. The EMM
source code will be hosted and maintained in the [Intel SGX PSW and SDK repository](https://github.com/intel/linux-sgx)
and can be built as a separate library to be linked into any runtime with the
abstraction layer APIs implemented.

## Notes on Internal Design ##

The enclave memory manager keeps track of memory allocation and layout info inside

> enclave address range (ELRANGE) using an internal structure called the Enclave Memory

Reviewer 2: Does this mean the enclave need to over request the ELRANGE during the creation?
Something like (where `ADDITIONAL REGION` is for the enclave to dynamically allocate via EMM):
```
[ENCLAVE LAYOUT][ADDITIONAL REGION]
<----          ELRANGE        ---->
```

And when 0-base enclave is enabled, the layout becomes

```
[REGION from ADDR 0][ENCLAVE LAYOUT][ADDITIONAL REGION]
<----                    ELRANGE                  ---->
```
I assume the EMM internally will ensure that `REGION from ADDR 0` should not be used?

Author: Runtime can return false from sgx_is_within_enclave or ema_alloc a RESERVED region for REGION from ADDR 0 with EMA_SYSTEM flag so no one else can allocate from it.

> Area (EMA) List. The EMA and EMA list are considered private data structure of memory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Area (EMA) List. The EMA and the EMA list are considered private data structures of the memory
```

manager, and their internals are not exposed in client-facing APIs.
- The EMA list tracks all memory regions in use (reserved, committed,
commit-on-demand) in ELRANGE.
- Ranges in ELRANGE not tracked by an EMA are considered free and ready for new allocations.
- The EMM labels certain EMAs reserved for runtime or its internal usage and make them
not accessible from public APIs.
- A thread calling an EMM API on an EMA with an operation pending in another thread will wait
until the pending operation is finished.

**Assumptions:**

> - When enclave is loaded, the OS reserves the whole address range covered by ELRANGE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When an enclave is loaded, the OS reserves the whole address range covered by ELRANGE.
```

It is assumed the host app will not remap any part of this reserved range.

> - When an enclave is loaded with base address at zero, only partial ELRANGE may be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When an enclave is loaded with base address at zero, only a partial ELRANGE may be
```

>   reserved by the OS. In that case, the EMM will assume the partial ELRANGE as valid reserved

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  reserved by the OS. In that case, the EMM will assume the partial ELRANGE as a valid reserved
```

  range for use inside the enclave.

> - Memory manager does not check EPC pressure, or proactively trim pages when EPC runs low.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The memory manager does not check EPC pressure, or proactively trim pages when EPC runs low.
```

The OS can reclaim EPC pages when EPC running low or cgroups threshold reached
- Memory manager does not maintain and recycle committed then freed pages

>   - Whenever a page is freed (via dealloc or uncommit API), it is trimmed from enclave
>   and need be re-allocated and committed before re-use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Whenever a page is freed (via dealloc or uncommit API), it is trimmed from the enclave
  and needs to be re-allocated and committed before re-use.
```

>   - Owner of a region can re-purpose a sub-region of it by calling sgx_mm_modify_type/permissions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The owner of a region can re-purpose a sub-region of it by calling sgx_mm_modify_type/permissions
```

  to split out the sub-region to be reused.

> - Memory manager does not call back client for #GP handling. Memory manager code will ensure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The memory manager does not call back into the client for #GP handling. Memory manager code will ensure that
```

itself would not cause #GP, and only register a #PF handler with the enclave global exception

> handler registry through the runtime abstraction layer. Clients wish to handle #GP can register

Reviewer: ```suggestion
handler registry through the runtime abstraction layer. A client wishing to handle #GP can register
```

 */
typedef struct _sgx_pfinfo
{
    uint64_t maddr; //address for #PF
    union _pfec
    {
        uint32_t errcd;
        struct
        {                     //PFEC bits
            uint32_t p : 1;   // P flag
            uint32_t rw : 1;  // RW access flag, 0 for read, 1 for write
            uint32_t : 13;    // U/S, I/O, PK and reserved bits not relevant for SGX PF
            uint32_t sgx : 1; // SGX bit
            uint32_t : 16;    // reserved bits
        };
    } pfec;
    uint32_t reserved;
} sgx_pfinfo;

/**
 * Custom page fault (#PF) handler, do usage specific processing upon #PF,
 * e.g., loading data and verify its trustworthiness, then call sgx_mm_commit_data
 * to explicitly EACCEPTCOPY data.
 * This custom handler is passed into sgx_mm_alloc, and associated with the
 * newly allocated region. The memory manager calls the handler when a #PF
 * happens in the associated region. The handler may invoke abort() if it
 * determines the exception is invalid based on certain internal states
 * it maintains.
 *
 * @param[in] pfinfo info reported in the SSA MISC region for page fault.
 * @param[in] private_data private data provided by handler in sgx_mm_alloc call.

>  * @retval SGX_EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_EXECUTION  Success on handling the exception.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * @retval SGX_EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_EXECUTION Success on handling the exception.
```

#define SGX_EMA_PAGE_TYPE_SS_REST   SGX_EMA_PAGE_TYPE(0x6)  /* the rest pages in shadow stack. */

/* Use bit 24-32 for alignment masks. */
#define SGX_EMA_ALIGNMENT_SHIFT 24
/*
 * Alignment (expressed in log2).  Must be >= log2(PAGE_SIZE) and
 * < # bits in a pointer (32 or 64).
 */
#define SGX_EMA_ALIGNED(n) (((unsigned int)(n) << SGX_EMA_ALIGNMENT_SHIFT))
#define SGX_EMA_ALIGNMENT_MASK SGX_EMA_ALIGNED(0xFFUL)
#define SGX_EMA_ALIGNMENT_64KB SGX_EMA_ALIGNED(16UL)
#define SGX_EMA_ALIGNMENT_16MB SGX_EMA_ALIGNED(24UL)
#define SGX_EMA_ALIGNMENT_4GB SGX_EMA_ALIGNED(32UL)

/* Permissions flags */
#define SGX_EMA_PROT_NOACCESS   0x0UL
#define SGX_EMA_PROT_READ       0x1UL
#define SGX_EMA_PROT_WRITE      0x2UL
#define SGX_EMA_PROT_EXECUTE    0x4UL

/*
 * Allocate a new memory region in enclave address space (ELRANGE).
 * @param[in] addr starting address of the region, page aligned. If NULL is provided,
 *                  then the function will select the starting address.
 * @param[in] length size of the region in multiples of page size in bytes.
 * @param[in] flags a bitwise OR of flags describing committing mode, committing

>  * order, address preference, page type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * order, address preference, and page type.
```

 *
 * @param[in] handler custom handler for page faults in this region, NULL if
 *                     no custom handling needed.
 * @param[in] handler_private private data for the @handler, which will be passed
 *                     back when the handler is called.
 * @param[out] out_addr pointer to store the start address of allocated range.
 *                     Set to valid address by the function on success, NULL otherwise.
 * @retval 0 The operation was successful.
 * @retval EACCES Region is outside enclave address space.
 * @retval EEXIST Any page in range requested is in use and SGX_EMA_FIXED is set.
 * @retval EINVAL Invalid alignment bouandary, i.e., n < 12 in SGX_EMA_ALIGNED(n).
 * @retval ENOMEM Out of memory, or no free space to satisfy alignment boundary.
 */
int sgx_mm_alloc(void *addr, size_t length, int flags,
                 sgx_enclave_fault_handler_t handler, void *handler_private,
                 void **out_addr);

```

**Remarks:**
- Permissions of newly allocated regions are always SGX_EMA_PROT_READ|SGX_EMA_PROT_WRITE and of page
    type SGX_EMA_PAGE_TYPE_REG, except for SGX_EMA_RESERVE mode regions which will have SGX_EMA_PROT_NONE.

> - Once allocated by sgx_mm_alloc, a region will stay in allocated state and become

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Once allocated by sgx_mm_alloc, a region will stay in the allocated state and become
```

    deallocated once sgx_mm_dealloc is called.
- If sgx_mm_dealloc on a partial range of a previously allocated region, then the
    region is split, and the freed range is deallocated. The remainder of the
    region stays allocated.
- If all pages in the region are freed by sgx_mm_dealloc, then the whole region
    is released, and the memory manager no longer tracks the region.

### sgx_mm_uncommit and sgx_mm_dealloc

```
/*
 * Uncommit (trim) physical EPC pages in a previously committed range.
 * The pages in the allocation are freed, but the address range is still reserved.
 * @param[in] addr page aligned start address of the region to be trimmed.
 * @param[in] length size in bytes of multiples of page size.
 * @retval 0 The operation was successful.
 * @retval EINVAL The address range is not allocated or outside enclave.
 */
int sgx_mm_uncommit(void *addr, size_t length);

/*
 * Deallocate the address range.
 * The pages in the allocation are freed and the address range is released for future allocation.

>  * @param[in] addr page aligned start address of the region to be freed and released

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * @param[in] addr page aligned start address of the region to be freed and released.
```

>  * @param[in] length size in bytes of multiples of page size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * @param[in] length size in bytes in multiples of page size.
```

Reviewer: Some places in this doc have "of multiples" and others say "in multiples".  I am not sure if they are intended to be the same.  Does this mean that the length must be a multiple of page size, as opposed to being the number of multiples of page size?

Author: length should be in bytes but the number value should be multiples of page size, k*4096. So is `of multiples of page size` better?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * @param[in] length size in bytes.  The length must be a multiple of the page size.
```

 * @retval 0 The operation was successful.
 * @retval EINVAL The address range is not allocated or outside enclave.
 */
int sgx_mm_dealloc(void *addr, size_t length);

```

### sgx_mm_modify_type, sgx_mm_modify_permissions and sgx_mm_modify_ex

```
/*

>  * Change permissions and/or page type of a previously allocated region

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Change permissions and/or page type of a previously allocated region.
```

 *        - SGX_EMA_PROT_EXECUTE: Pages may be executed.
 *
 * @param[in] type page type, one of the following
 *       - SGX_EMA_PAGE_TYPE_TCS: TCS page
 *       - -1: no page type change, keep the original type
 *
 * @retval 0 The operation was successful.
 * @retval EACCES Original page type can not be changed to target type.
 * @retval EINVAL The memory region was not allocated or outside enclave
                  or other invalid parameters.
 * @retval EPERM The request permissions are not allowed, e.g., by target page type or
 *               SELinux policy, or target page type is no allowed by this API, e.g., PT_TRIM,
 *               PT_SS_FIRST, PT_SS_REST.
 */
int sgx_mm_modify_ex(void *addr, size_t length, int prot, int type);

/*
 * Change permissions of an allocated region.
 * Equivalent to sgx_mm_modify_ex(addr, length, prot, -1).
 */
int sgx_mm_modify_permissions(void *addr, size_t length, int prot);

/*
 * Change permissions of an allocated region.
 * Equivalent to sgx_mm_modify_ex(addr, length, -1, type).
 */
int sgx_mm_modify_type(void *addr, size_t length, int type);

```
**Remarks:**
- The memory manager will track current permissions for each region, and can

>     determine whether new permissions require an OCall for EMODPR, e.g RW<->RX, RW->R.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    determine whether new permissions require an OCall for EMODPR, e.g., RW<->RX, RW->R.
```

 * @retval EFAULT All other errors.
 */
int sgx_mm_commit(void *addr, size_t length);

```

### sgx_mm_commit_data

```

/*
 * Load data into target pages within a region previously allocated by sgx_mm_alloc.
 * This can be called to load data and set target permissions at the same time,
 * e.g., dynamic code loading. The caller has verified data to be trusted and expected
 * to be loaded to the target address range. Calling this API on pages already committed
 * will fail.
 * @param[in] addr page aligned target starting addr.
 * @param[in] length length of data, in bytes of multiples of page size.
 * @param[in] data data of @length.
 * @param[in] prot target permission.
 * @retval 0 The operation was successful.
 * @retval EINVAL Any page in requested address range is not previously allocated, or
 *                outside the enclave address range.
 * @retval EPERM Any page in requested range is previously committed.
 * @retval EPERM The target permissions are not allowed by OS security policy,
 *                  e.g., SELinux rules.
 */
int sgx_mm_commit_data(void *addr, size_t length, uint8_t *data, int prot);

```
**Remarks:**

> - The memory manager decides whether OCalls are needed to request OS to make PTE

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The memory manager decides whether OCalls are needed to ask the OS to make Page Table Entry (PTE)
```

permissions changes. No separate sgx_mm_modify call is needed.

Runtime Abstraction Layer
----------------------------------

To support and use the EMM, an SGX trusted runtime shall implement following
abstraction layer APIs.

### Exception Handler Registration

```
/* Return value used by the EMM #PF handler to indicate
 *  to the dispatcher that it should continue searching for the next handler.
 */
#define SGX_EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_SEARCH 0x0

/* Return value used by the EMM #PF handler to indicate
 *  to the dispatcher that it should stop searching and continue execution.
 */
#define SGX_EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_EXECUTION 0xFFFFFFFF

/*
 * The EMM page fault (#PF) handler
 *

>  * @param[in] pfinfo info reported in the SSA MISC region for page fault

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * @param[in] pfinfo info reported in the SSA MISC region for page fault.
```
nit: Be consistent throughout this file in terms of whether param descriptions end in a period or not.

 * @retval SGX_EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_EXECUTION Success handling the exception.
 * @retval SGX_EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_SEARCH The EMM does not handle the exception.
 */
typedef int (*sgx_enclave_pfhandler_t)(const sgx_pfinfo *pfinfo);

/*
 * Register the EMM handler with the global exception handler registry
 * The Runtime should ensure this handler is called first in case of
 * a #PF before all other handlers.
 *
 * @param[in] pfhandler the EMM page fault handler.
 * @retval true Success.
 * @retval false Failure.
 */
bool sgx_register_pfhandler(sgx_enclave_pfhandler_t pfhandler);

/**

>  * Unregister the EMM handler with the global exception handler registry

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Unregister the EMM handler with the global exception handler registry.
```

 * @param[in] pfhandler the EMM page fault handler.
 * @retval true Success.
 * @retval false Failure.
 */
bool sgx_unregister_pfhandler(sgx_enclave_pfhandler_t pfhandler);

```

### OCalls

```
/*

>  * Call OS to reserve region for EAUG, immediately or on-demand

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Call OS to reserve region for EAUG, immediately or on-demand.
```

 *
 * @param[in] addr desired page aligned start address, NULL if no desired address
 * @param[in] length size of the region in multiples of page size in bytes

>  * @param[in] flags  a bitwise OR of flags describing committing mode, committing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * @param[in] flags a bitwise OR of flags describing committing mode, committing
```

 *                     order, address preference, page type. The untrusted side

>  *    implementation should always invoke mmap syscall with MAP_SHARED|MAP_FIXED_NOREPLACE, and

Reviewer: nit: shouldn't these two lines have the same indentation?

 *                              to lower addresses, no gaps in addresses above the last committed.
 *            - SGX_EMA_GROWSUP: if supported, a hint given for the kernel to EAUG pages from lower
 *                              to higher addresses, no gaps in addresses below the last committed.
 *        Optionally ORed with
 *            -  SGX_EMA_ALIGNED(n):	Align the region on a requested	boundary.
 *                           Fail if a suitable region cannot be found,
 *                           The argument n specifies the binary logarithm of
 *                           the desired alignmentand must be at least 12.
 *        Optionally ORed with one of following page types:
 *             - SGX_EMA_PAGE_TYPE_REG: regular page type. This is the default if not specified.
 *             - SGX_EMA_PAGE_TYPE_SS_FIRST: the first page in shadow stack.
 *             - SGX_EMA_PAGE_TYPE_SS_REST: the rest page in shadow stack.
 * @retval 0 The operation was successful.
 * @retval EINVAL Any parameter passed in is not valid.
 * @retval errno Error as reported by dependent syscalls, e.g., mmap().
 */
int sgx_mmap_ocall(void *addr, size_t length, int prot, int flags);

/*

>  * Call OS to change permissions, type, or notify EACCEPT done after TRIM

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Call OS to change permissions, type, or notify EACCEPT done after TRIM.
```

 *
 * @param[in] addr start address of the memory to change protections.
 * @param[in] length length of the area.  This must be a multiple of the page size.
 * @param[in] flags this must be OR'ed of following:
 *            SGX_EMA_PROT_READ
 *            SGX_EMA_PROT_WRITE
 *            SGX_EMA_PROT_EXEC
 *            SGX_EMA_PAGE_TYPE_TRIM: change the page type to PT_TRIM, implies RW.
 *            SGX_EMA_PAGE_TYPE_TCS: change the page type to PT_TCS
 *            SGX_EMA_PROT_NOACCESS: Signal the kernel EACCEPT is done for PT_TRIM pages.
 * @retval 0 The operation was successful.

>  * @retval EINVAL if any parameter passed in is not valid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * @retval EINVAL A parameter passed in is not valid.
```
retval generates a table where everything after the first token is in a separate column.  Use complete sentences line lines 500 and 502 do, no "if"

 * @retval 0 The operation was successful.
 * @retval errno Error as reported by munmap syscall.
 */
int sgx_munmap_ocall(void *addr, size_t length);

```

### Other Utilities

```
/*
 * Define a mutex and init/lock/unlock/destroy functions.
 */
typedef struct sgx_mutex_t;
int sgx_mutex_init(sgx_mutex_t* mutex);
int sgx_mutex_lock(sgx_mutex_t* mutex);
int sgx_mutex_unlock(sgx_mutex_t* mutex);
int sgx_mutex_destroy(sgx_mutex_t* mutex);

/*
 * Check whether the given buffer is strictly within the enclave.
 *
 * Check whether the buffer given by the **ptr** and **size** parameters is
 * strictly within the enclave's memory. If so, return true. If any
 * portion of the buffer lies outside the enclave's memory, return false.
 *
 * @param[in] ptr The pointer pointer to buffer.
 * @param[in] size The size of the buffer
 *
 * @retval true The buffer is strictly within the enclave.
 * @retval false At least some part of the buffer is outside the enclave, or
 * the arguments are invalid. For example, if **ptr** is null or **size**
 * causes arithmetic operations to wrap.
 *
 */
bool sgx_is_within_enclave(const void *ptr, size_t size);

```

### Support for EMM Initialization

> In addition to implement the abstraction layer APIs, a runtime shall provide

Author: The initial idea was for runtime to call ema_alloc with EMA_SYSTEM flag to set up those initial layouts. And other private APIs below can be used to adjust attributes and boundaries of initially committed pages

Now I am also thinking to add one more API specific for EADDed regions, some thing like this:
```
/*
 * Initialize an EMA. This can be used to setup EMAs to account regions that
 * are loaded and initialized with EADD before EINIT.  
 * @param[in] addr Starting address of the region, page aligned. If NULL is provided,
 *                  then the function will select the starting address.
 * @param[in] length Size of the region in multiples of page size in bytes.
 * @param[in] flags SGX_EMA_SYSTEM, or SGX_EMA_SYSTEM | SGX_EMA_RESERVE
 *           bitwise ORed with one of following page types:
 *             - SGX_EMA_PAGE_TYPE_REG: regular page type. This is the default if not specified.
 *             - SGX_EMA_PAGE_TYPE_TCS: TCS page.
 *             - SGX_EMA_PAGE_TYPE_SS_FIRST: the first page in shadow stack.
 *             - SGX_EMA_PAGE_TYPE_SS_REST: the rest page in shadow stack.
 * @param[in] prot permissions, either SGX_EMA_PROT_NONE or a bitwise OR of following with:
 *        - SGX_EMA_PROT_READ: Pages may be read.
 *        - SGX_EMA_PROT_WRITE: Pages may be written.
 *        - SGX_EMA_PROT_EXECUTE: Pages may be executed.
 * @param[in] handler A custom handler for page faults in this region, NULL if
 *                     no custom handling needed.
 * @param[in] handler_private Private data for the @handler, which will be passed
 *                     back when the handler is called.
 * @retval 0 The operation was successful.
 * @retval EACCES Region is outside enclave address space.
 * @retval EEXIST Any page in range requested is in use.
 * @retval EINVAL Invalid page type, flags, or addr and length are not page aligned.
 */ 
int ema_init(void *addr, size_t length, int flags, int prot,
              sgx_enclave_fault_handler_t handler,
              void *handler_private);
```

iniitial enclave memory layout information to the EMM during early
initialization phase of the enclave.

> The memory manager must be initialized in first ECALL (ECMD_INIT_ENCLAVE in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The memory manager must be initialized in the first ECALL (ECMD_INIT_ENCLAVE in
```

> Intel SGX SDK) before any other clients can use it. Therefore, code and data

Reviewer: When this document says "Intel SGX SDK" does it refer to both the Intel SGX SDK for Linux and the Intel SGX SDK for Windows, since those are different SDKs?  Clarify.  Avoid ever using the term "Intel SGX SDK" without "for ..." since the term is ambiguous/confusing.

of the memory manager will be part of initial enclave image that are loaded
with EADD before EINIT, and as a part of the trusted runtime.

The trusted runtime should enumerate all initial committed regions (code,

> data, heap, stack, TCS, SSA), and call the EMM internal APIs to setup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data, heap, stack, TCS, and SSA), and call the EMM internal APIs to set up
```

initial entries in the EMA list to track existing regions and mark some

> of them not modifiable by EMM public APIs. Runtime also ensures there is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of them as not modifiable by EMM public APIs. The runtime also ensures there is
```

> enough reserved space on heap for EMM to create the initial EMA list and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
enough reserved space on the heap for EMM to create the initial EMA list and
```

the entries. Once initialized, the memory manager can reserve its own
space for future expansion of the EMA list, and special EMAs to hold
EMA objects. To keep it simple, the expansion can be done eagerly: commit
more pages for EMA list once unused committed space in the EMA List Region
below certain threshold.

Alternative option: At build time, the enclave signing tool can precalculate

> and fill in EMA entries that holds info of initial regions to be committed by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and fill in EMA entries that hold info on initial regions to be committed by
```

EADD during enclave load. The calculated start addresses in these EMAs can be

> relative to enclave secs->base. Runtime can patch those entries at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
relative to enclave secs->base. The runtime can patch those entries at
```

a number of additional pages for future EMA list expansion.

### EMM Private APIs for Trusted Runtimes
These private APIs can be used by the trusted runtime to reserve and allocate
regions not accessible from public APIs. They have the identical signature
as the public API counterparts and replace "sgx_mm_" prefix with "ema_" prefix.
The main difference is that the private ema_alloc allows an extra flag
SGX_EMA_SYSTEM passed in.

```
#define SGX_EMA_SYSTEM SGX_EMA_ALLOC_FLAGS(0x40) /* EMA reserved by system */

/**
 * Same as sgx_mm_alloc, SGX_EMA_SYSTEM can be OR'ed with flags to indicate
 * that the EMA can not be modified thru public APIs
 */
int ema_alloc(void *addr, size_t length, int flags,
              sgx_enclave_fault_handler_t handler,
              void *handler_private,
              void **out_addr);

int ema_dealloc(void *addr, size_t length);

int ema_uncommit(void *addr, size_t length);

int ema_commit(void *addr, size_t length);

int ema_commit_data(void *addr, size_t length, uint8_t *data, int prot);

int ema_modify_ex(void *addr, size_t length, int prot, int type);

```

Internal APIs and Structures
-------------------------------------

> Following are internal functions and structures to be used by EMM implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following are internal functions and structures to be used by the EMM implementation.
```

> They can evolve over time, shown here for reference only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They can evolve over time, and are shown here for reference only.
```

                                        // OR'ed with SGX_EMA_SYSTEM, SGX_EMA_GROWSDOWN, ENA_GROWSUP
    uint64_t            si_flags;       // SGX_EMA_PROT_NOACCESS, SGX_EMA_PROT_READ |{SGX_EMA_PROT_WRITE, SGX_EMA_PROT_EXECUTE}
                                        // Or'd with one of SGX_EMA_PAGE_TYPE_REG, SGX_EMA_PAGE_TYPE_TCS, SGX_EMA_PAGE_TYPE_TRIM
    ema_bit_array*      eaccept_map;    // bitmap for EACCEPT status, bit 0 in eaccept_map[0] for the page at start address
                                        // bit i in eaccept_map[j] for page at start_address+(i+j<<3)<<12
    sgx_mutex_t*        lock;           // lock to prevent concurrent modification
    int                 transition;     // state to indicate whether a transition in progress, e.g page type/permission changes.
    sgx_enclave_fault_handler_t
                        h;              // custom PF handler  (for EACCEPTCOPY use)
    void*               hprivate;       // private data for handler
    _ema_t*             next;           // next in doubly linked list
    _ema_t*             prev;           // prev in doubly linked list
} ema_t;

```
 **Remarks:**

>  - Access to the list (find, insert, remove EMAs) are synchronized for thread-safety.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Accesses to the list (find, insert, remove EMAs) are synchronized for thread-safety.
```

 - Initial implementation will also have one lock per EMA to synchronize access and
 modifications to the same EMA. We may optimize this as needed.

### SGX primitives

```
typedef struct _sec_info_t
{
    uint64_t         flags;
    uint64_t         reserved[7];
} sec_info_t;

// EACCEPT
int do_eaccept(const sec_info_t* si, size_t addr);
//EMODPE
int do_emodpe(const sec_info_t* si, size_t addr);
//EACCEPTCOPY
int do_eacceptcopy(const sec_info_t* si, size_t dest, size_t src);

```

Metadata,  File format
---------------------------------------

> Enclave metadata and file format are runtime specific. Detailed design is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The enclave metadata and file format are runtime specific. A detailed design is
```

SGX Enclave Memory Manager
=================================

## Motivation ##

An enclave's memory is backed by a special reserved region in RAM, called
Enclave Page Cache (EPC). Enclave memory management tasks include
allocating/reserving virtual address ranges, committing physical EPC pages,
changing EPC page permissions or page types, and removing EPC pages.
Those tasks require collaboration between the trusted runtime, the untrusted
runtime, and the OS. The SGX enclave memory manager (EMM) serves as a central
component in the enclave trusted runtime that abstracts the interaction with
the untrusted runtime for all memory management flows and provides APIs for
its clients to reserve virtual address ranges, commit EPC memory to the reserved
address ranges, and modify attributes of the reserved/committed pages.

For details of specific memory management related flows, please refer to

> [the SGX EDMM driver API spec](https://github.com/openenclave/openenclave/pull/3755/files).

Reviewer: design docs shouldn't refer to pull requests, only other docs

Author: will resolve this after driver interface merged

mprotect, higher level language JIT compiler, etc.

## User Experience ##

**Allocate, Deallocate Enclave Memory**

The EMM provides an API, sgx_mm_alloc, for clients to request enclave memory
allocations. An enclave memory allocation represents both a reserved virtual
address range and a commitment of EPC pages.  EPC pages are committed for
enclaves via special SGX instructions: loaded by EADD/EEXTEND before EINIT
or dynamically added using EAUG followed by EACCEPT.

The sgx_mm_alloc API allows clients to specify one of three committing modes
for an allocation:
- EMA_RESERVE, only the virtual address range is reserved. No EPC pages will
be committed in this mode.
- EMA_COMMIT_NOW: reserves and commits physical EPC upon allocation.
EACCEPT will be done immediately.
- EMA_COMMIT_ON_DEMAND: EACCEPT is done on demand, see below on committing
and uncommitting.

An allocation, once created, will own its address range until the deallocation
API, sgx_mm_dealloc, is called upon. No two active allocations can have
overlapping address ranges.

**Commit, Uncommit Enclave Memory**

When a page in COMMIT_ON_DEMAND allocations is accessed, a page fault occurs if

> the page was not yet commited.  The EMM will perform EACCEPT to commit the EPC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the page was not yet committed.  The EMM will perform EACCEPT to commit the EPC
```
typo

page on page fault after OS doing EAUG.

The clients can also call the EMM commit API, sgx_mm_commit, to proactively
commit specific sub-regions in a COMMIT_ON_DEMAND allocation to avoid
future page fault.

Some EMM clients, <i>e.g.</i>, a dynamic code loader wishing to load code on
page faults, can register a custom handler for page faults at the time of
allocation request. In the custom page fault handler, it can invoke an API,
sgx_mm_commit_data, to commit and load data to newly committed EPC page at
the same time as supported by EACCEPTCOPY.

Committed pages will stay committed (regardless how they were committed) until
the clients calls the uncommit API, sgx_mm_uncommit, on them or the allocation
they belong to is deallocated by sgx_mm_dealloc.

**Modify Page Attributes**

The EMM clients may call sgx_mm_modify/sgx_mm_modify_ex to request permissions
and/or page type changes for pages in existing allocations.

**Runtime Abstraction Layer**

To make the EMM implementation portable across different SGX runtimes,

> e.g. OpenEnclave and Intel SGX SDKs, this document also proposes an abstraction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
e.g., OpenEnclave and Intel SGX SDKs, this document also proposes an abstraction
```

 */
typedef struct _sgx_pfinfo
{
    uint64_t maddr; //address for #PF
    union _pfec
    {
        uint32_t errcd;
        struct
        {                     //PFEC bits
            uint32_t p : 1;   // P flag
            uint32_t rw : 1;  // RW access flag, 0 for read, 1 for write
            uint32_t : 13;    // U/S, I/O, PK and reserved bits not relevant for SGX PF
            uint32_t sgx : 1; // SGX bit
            uint32_t : 16;    // reserved bits
        };
    } pfec;
    uint32_t reserved;
} sgx_pfinfo;

/**
 * Custom page fault (#PF) handler, do usage specific processing upon #PF,
 * e.g. loading data and verify its trustworthiness, then call sgx_mm_commit_data
 * to explicitly EACCEPTCOPY data.
 * This custom handler is passed into sgx_mm_alloc, and associated with the
 * newly allocated region. The memory manager calls the handler when a #PF
 * happens in the associated region. The handler may invoke abort() if it
 * determines the exception is invalid based on certain internal states
 * it maintains.
 *
 * @param[in] pfinfo, info reported in the SSA MISC region for page fault.
 * @param[in] private_data, private data provided by handler in sgx_mm_alloc call.

>  * @retval EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_EXECUTION,  success on handling the exception.
>  * @retval EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_SEARCH, Exception not handled and should be passed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * @retval EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_EXECUTION Success on handling the exception.
 * @retval EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_SEARCH Exception not handled and should be passed.
```

nit: Don't put comma after value name in doxygen comments, and be consistent in terms of whether the next word is capitalized or not, and whether the phrase ends in punctuation

 *         some other handler.
 *
 */

> typedef int (*enclave_fault_handler_t)(const sgx_pfinfo *pfinfo, void *private_data);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
typedef int (*sgx_enclave_fault_handler_t)(const sgx_pfinfo *pfinfo, void *private_data);
```

#define EMA_PAGE_TYPE_MASK      EMA_PAGE_TYPE(0xFF)
#define EMA_PAGE_TYPE_TCS       EMA_PAGE_TYPE(0x1)  /* TCS page type */
#define EMA_PAGE_TYPE_REG       EMA_PAGE_TYPE(0x2)  /* regular page type, default if not specified. */
#define EMA_PAGE_TYPE_TRIM      EMA_PAGE_TYPE(0x4)  /* TRIM page type */
#define EMA_PAGE_TYPE_SS_FIRST  EMA_PAGE_TYPE(0x5)  /* the first page in shadow stack. */
#define EMA_PAGE_TYPE_SS_REST   EMA_PAGE_TYPE(0x6)  /* the rest pages in shadow stack. */

/* Use bit 24-32 for alignment masks. */
#define EMA_ALIGNMENT_SHIFT 24
/*
 * Alignment (expressed in log2).  Must be >= log2(PAGE_SIZE) and
 * < # bits in a pointer (32 or 64).
 */
#define EMA_ALIGNED(n) (((unsigned int)(n) << EMA_ALIGNMENT_SHIFT))
#define EMA_ALIGNMENT_MASK EMA_ALIGNED(0xFFUL)
#define EMA_ALIGNMENT_64KB EMA_ALIGNED(16UL)
#define EMA_ALIGNMENT_16MB EMA_ALIGNED(24UL)
#define EMA_ALIGNMENT_4GB EMA_ALIGNED(32UL)

/* Permissions flags */
#define EMA_PROT_NOACCESS   0x0UL
#define EMA_PROT_READ       0x1UL
#define EMA_PROT_WRITE      0x2UL
#define EMA_PROT_EXECUTE    0x4UL

/*
 * Allocate a new memory region in enclave address space (ELRANGE).

>  * @param[in] addr, starting address of the region, page aligned. If NULL is provided,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * @param[in] addr starting address of the region, page aligned. If NULL is provided,
```
Don't put comma after param name in doxygen comments

 *                  then the function will select the starting address.
 * @param[in] length, size of the region in multiples of page size in bytes.
 * @param[in] flags, a bitwise OR of flags describing committing mode, committing
 * order, address preference, page type
 *        Flags should include exactly one of following for committing mode:

>  *            - EMA_RESERVE: just reserve an address range, no EPC commited.

Reviewer: prefix these defines with SGX_ if they are used with a function (like this one) that starts with sgx_
```suggestion
 *            - SGX_EMA_RESERVE: just reserve an address range, no EPC committed.
```
also note typo at end :)

 * will fail.
 * @param[in] addr, page aligned target starting addr.
 * @param[in] length, length of data, in bytes of multiples of page size.
 * @param[in] data, data of @length.
 * @param[in] prot, target permission.
 * @retval 0 on success.
 * @retval EINVAL if any page in requested address range is not previously allocated, or
 *                outside the enclave address range.
 * @retval EPERM if any page in requested range is previously committed.
 * @retval EPERM if the target permissions are not allowed by OS security policy,
 *                  e.g., SELinux rules.
 */
int sgx_mm_commit_data(void *addr, size_t length, uint8_t *data, int prot);

```
**Remarks:**
- The memory manager decides whether OCalls are needed to request OS to make PTE
permissions changes. No separate sgx_mm_modify call is needed.

Runtime Abstraction Layer
----------------------------------

To support and use the EMM, an SGX trusted runtime shall implement following
abstraction layer APIs.

### Exception Handler Registration

```
/* Return value used by the EMM #PF handler to indicate
 *  to the dispatcher that it should continue searching for the next handler.
 */

> #define EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_SEARCH 0x0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#define SGX_EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_SEARCH 0x0
```

/* Return value used by the EMM #PF handler to indicate
 *  to the dispatcher that it should stop searching and continue execution.
 */

> #define EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_EXECUTION 0xFFFFFFFF

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#define SGX_EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_EXECUTION 0xFFFFFFFF
```

/*
 * The EMM page fault (#PF) handler
 *
 * @param[in] pfinfo, info reported in the SSA MISC region for page fault
 * @retval EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_EXECUTION on success handling the exception.
 * @retval EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_SEARCH if the EMM does not handle the exception.
 */

> typedef int (*enclave_pfhandler_t)(const sgx_pfinfo *pfinfo);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
typedef int (*sgx_enclave_pfhandler_t)(const sgx_pfinfo *pfinfo);
```

 *            - EMA_COMMIT_NOW: reserves memory range with EMA_PROT_READ|EMA_PROT_WRITE, if supported, 
 *                   kernel is given a hint to EAUG EPC pages for the area as soon as possible.
 *            - EMA_COMMIT_ON_DEMAND: reserves memory range, EPC pages can be EAUGed upon #PF.
 *        ORed with zero or one of the committing order flags:
 *            - EMA_GROWSDOWN: if supported, a hint given for the kernel to EAUG pages from higher
 *                              to lower addresses, no gaps in addresses above the last committed.
 *            - EMA_GROWSUP: if supported, a hint given for the kernel to EAUG pages from lower
 *                              to higher addresses, no gaps in addresses below the last committed.
 *        Optionally ORed with
 *            -  EMA_ALIGNED(n):	Align the region on a requested	boundary.
 *                           Fail if a suitable region cannot be found,
 *                           The argument n specifies the binary logarithm of
 *                           the desired alignmentand must be at least 12.
 *        Optionally ORed with one of following page types:

>  *             - EMA_PAGE_TYPE_REG: regular page type.This is the default if not specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 *             - EMA_PAGE_TYPE_REG: regular page type. This is the default if not specified.
```

 *             - EMA_PAGE_TYPE_SS_FIRST: the first page in shadow stack.
 *             - EMA_PAGE_TYPE_SS_REST: the rest page in shadow stack. 

>  * @retval 0 on success.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * @retval 0 The operation was successful.
```
Doxygen generates a table, so after the return value should be a statement to appear in the 2nd column of the table.  Recommend phrasing it like an error message, as a sentence.

 * @retval EINVAL if any parameter passed in is not valid.

>  * @retval errno reported by dependent syscalls, e.g. mmap().

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * @retval errno reported by dependent syscalls, e.g., mmap().
```

 * @retval 0 on success
 * @retval EINVAL if any parameter passed in is not valid.
 * @retval errno reported by dependent syscalls, e.g. mprotect().
 */

int sgx_mprotect_ocall(void *addr, size_t length, int flags);

/*
 * OCall to make regular munmap syscall.
 * @param[in] addr, start address of the memory to unmap.
 * @param[in] length, length of the area.  This must be a multiple of the page size.
 * @retval 0 on success
 * @retval errno reported by munmap syscall
 */
int sgx_munmap_ocall(void *addr, size_t length);

```

### Other Utilities

```
/*
 * Define a mutex and init/lock/unlock/destroy functions.
 */
typedef sgx_mutex_t;
int sgx_mutex_init(sgx_mutex_t* mutex);
int sgx_mutex_lock(sgx_mutex_t* mutex);
int sgx_mutex_unlock(sgx_mutex_t* mutex);
int sgx_mutex_destroy(sgx_mutex_t* mutex);

/*
 * Check whether the given buffer is strictly within the enclave.
 *
 * Check whether the buffer given by the **ptr** and **size** parameters is
 * strictly within the enclave's memory. If so, return true. If any
 * portion of the buffer lies outside the enclave's memory, return false.
 *
 * @param[in] ptr The pointer pointer to buffer.

>  * @param[in] size The size of buffer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * @param[in] size The size of the buffer.
```

The main difference is that the private ema_alloc allows an extra flag
EMA_SYSTEM passed in.

```
#define EMA_SYSTEM EMA_ALLOC_FLAGS(0x40) /* EMA reserved by system */

/**
 * Same as sgx_mm_alloc, EMA_SYSTEM can be OR'ed with flags to indicate
 * that the EMA can not be modified thru public APIs
 */
int ema_alloc(void *addr, size_t length, int flags,
              enclave_fault_handler_t handler,
              void *handler_private,
              void **out_addr);

int ema_dealloc(void *addr, size_t length);

int ema_uncommit(void *addr, size_t length);

int ema_commit(void *addr, size_t length);

int ema_commit_data(void *addr, size_t length, uint8_t *data, int prot);

int ema_modify_ex(void *addr, size_t length, int prot, int type);

```

Internal APIs and Structures
-------------------------------------

Following are internal functions and structures to be used by EMM implementation.
They can evolve over time, shown here for reference only.

### Enclave Memory Area (EMA) struct

Each enclave has a global doubly linked EMA list to keep track of all dynamically
allocated regions in enclave address space (ELRANGE).

```

> typedef BitArray;

Reviewer: what is BitArray?  should it be `sgx_bit_array_t`?

Author: will remove this definition. It is implementation detail and  the comments for eaccept_map should be enough for design doc.

> typedef struct _ema_t {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
typedef struct _sgx_ema_t {
```

    uint32_t            alloc_flags;    // EMA_RESERVED, EMA_COMMIT_NOW, EMA_COMMIT_ON_DEMAND,
                                        // OR'ed with EMA_SYSTEM, EMA_GROWSDOWN, ENA_GROWSUP
    uint64_t            si_flags;       // EMA_PROT_NOACCESS, EMA_PROT_READ |{EMA_PROT_WRITE, EMA_PROT_EXECUTE}
                                        // Or'd with one of EMA_PAGE_TYPE_REG, EMA_PAGE_TYPE_TCS, EMA_PAGE_TYPE_TRIM
    BitArray*           eaccept_map;    // bitmap for EACCEPT status, bit 0 in eaccept_map[0] for the page at start address
                                        // bit i in eaccept_map[j] for page at start_address+(i+j<<3)<<12
    sgx_mutex_t*        lock;           // lock to prevent concurrent modification
    int                 transition;     // state to indicate whether a transition in progress, e.g page type/permission changes.
    enclave_fault_handler_t
                        h;              // custom PF handler  (for EACCEPTCOPY use)
    void*               hprivate;       // private data for handler
    ema_t*              next;           // next in doubly linked list
    ema_t*              prev;           // prev in doubly linked list

> } ema_t;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
} sgx_ema_t;
```

 *              Must be bitwise OR of following:
 *            SGX_EMA_PROT_READ
 *            SGX_EMA_PROT_WRITE
 *            SGX_EMA_PROT_EXEC
 *            SGX_EMA_PAGE_TYPE_REG: regular page, changeable to TRIM and TCS
 *            SGX_EMA_PAGE_TYPE_TRIM: signal to the kernel EACCEPT is done for TRIM pages.
 * @param[in] flags_to The target EPCM flags. This must be bitwise OR of following:
 *            SGX_EMA_PROT_READ
 *            SGX_EMA_PROT_WRITE
 *            SGX_EMA_PROT_EXEC
 *            SGX_EMA_PAGE_TYPE_TRIM: change the page type to PT_TRIM. Note the address
 *                      range for trimmed pages may still be reserved by enclave with
 *                      proper permissions.
 *            SGX_EMA_PAGE_TYPE_TCS: change the page type to PT_TCS
 * @retval 0 The operation was successful.
 * @retval EINVAL A parameter passed in is not valid.
 * @retval errno Error as reported by dependent syscalls, e.g., mprotect().
 */

int sgx_mm_modify_ocall(uint64_t addr, size_t length, int flags_from, int flags_to);

```

### Other Utilities

```
/*
 * Define a mutex and create/lock/unlock/destroy functions.
 */
typedef struct _sgx_mm_mutex sgx_mm_mutex;

> sgx_mm_mutex *sgx_mm_mutex_create(void);

Reviewer 2: Does this assume creating a non-recursive mutex?

iniitial enclave memory layout information to the EMM during early
initialization phase of the enclave.
The memory manager must be initialized in the first ECALL (ECMD_INIT_ENCLAVE in
Intel SGX SDK) before any other clients can use it. Therefore, code and data
of the memory manager will be part of initial enclave image that are loaded
with EADD before EINIT, and as a part of the trusted runtime.

To initialize EMM internals, the trusted runtime should first invoke sgx_mm_init,
passing in an address range available for non-system or so-called user allocations.

```
/*
 * Initialize the EMM internals and reserve the whole range available for user
 * allocations via the public sgx_mm_alloc API. This should be called before
 * any other APIs invoked. The runtime should not intend to allocate any subregion
 * in [user_start, user_end) for system usage, i.e., the EMM will fail any allocation
 * request with SGX_EMA_SYSTEM flag in this range and return an EINVAL error.
 * @param[in] user_start The start of the user address range, page aligned.
 * @param[in] user_end The end (exclusive) of the user address range, page aligned.
 */

> void sgx_mm_init(size_t user_start, size_t user_end);

Author: This function only try to reserve an initial area (16 pages) for internal use and will call abort() if fails for some reason, e.g. there is not enough in [user_start, user_end).  Was the hang on this API or subsequent calls to other APIs?

> void sgx_mm_init(size_t user_start, size_t user_end);

Author: @mingweishih I will change to return ENOMEM if internal allocation failed for initial area. Let me know if more concerns.

> void sgx_mm_init(size_t user_start, size_t user_end);

Reviewer 2: Sounds good to me. Can you update this document as well?

> void sgx_mm_init(size_t user_start, size_t user_end);

Author: updated now.
